.. _fecal_sequel_sample_data:

Marker data
===========

Either clone the THAPBI PICT source code repository, or decompress the
latest source code release (``.tar.gz`` file). You should find it contains
a directory ``examples/fecal_sequel/`` which is for this example.

Shell scripts ``setup.sh`` and ``run.sh`` should reproduce the analysis
discussed.

FASTQ data
----------

File ``PRJNA574765`` was download from the ENA and includes the FASTQ
checksums, URLs, and the key metadata. Related file ``metadata.tsv``
contains report-ready metadata about the samples (see below).

Script ``setup.sh`` will download the raw FASTQ files for Walker *et al.*
(2019) from https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJNA574765

It will download 120 raw FASTQ files (60 pairs), taking about 641MB on disk

If you have the ``md5sum`` tool installed (standard on Linux), verify the FASTQ
files downloaded correctly:

.. code:: console

    $ cd raw_data/
    $ md5sum -c MD5SUM.txt
    ...
    $ cd ..

There is no need to decompress the files.

We focus on bioproject PRJNA574765 which has 60 samples and covers the mock
communities. Additionally the paper describes PRJNA525109 (41 samples
comparing genetic efficacy vs traditional survey techniques), and PRJNA525407
(9 samples looking at bat species assemblages in archaeological sites in
Belize, with an expanded reference set).

Amplicon primers & reference sequences
--------------------------------------

The primer pair is SFF_145f (``GTHACHGCYCAYGCHTTYGTAATAAT``) and SFF_351r
(``CTCCWGCRTGDGCWAGRTTTCC``).

The reference set of COI sequences is taken from Supplementary S2 in the
preceding paper (which also included bioproject PRJNA325503 with 9 samples):

    Walker *et al.* (2016)
    Species From Feces: Order-Wide Identification of Chiroptera From Guano and
    Other Non-Invasive Genetic Samples.
    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0162342

File ``COI_430_bats.fasta`` of pre-trimmed bat COI markers is generated by
``setup.sh`` by downloading the FASTA file from Walker *et al.* (2016)
Supplementary S2, with underscores replaced with spaces in the record names.

Provided file ``observed_3_bats.fasta`` contains alternative COI markers
observed in at least 10 samples, and their assumed species source. This is
for discussing the effect of the database.

Metadata
--------

The provided file ``metadata.tsv`` is based on ``PRJNA574765`` but breaks up
the sample name into separate columns:

1. Accession, assigned by the public archive, e.g. "SRR10198789"
2. Rare, which of the 3 species is at low abundance, "COTO", "EPFU" or "TABR".
3. Ratio, either "1:64" (rare) or "1:192" (very rare)
4. Replicate, "01" to "10" (leading zero for alphabetical sorting)

The four letter appreviations are *Corynorhinus townsendii* (COTO),
*Eptesicus fuscus* (EPFU) and *Tadarida brasiliensis* (TABR).

When calling THAPBI PICT, the meta data commands are given as follows:

.. code:: console

    $ thapbi_pict ... -t metadata.tsv -x 1 -c 2,3,4

Argument ``-t metadata.tsv`` says to use this file for the metadata.

The ``-x 1`` argument indicates the filename stem can be found in column 1,
Accession.

Argument ``-c 2,3,4`` says which columns to display and sort by (do not
include the indexed column again). i.e. Rare species, ratio, replicate.

We have not given a ``-g`` argument to assign colour bands in the Excel
reports, so it will default to the first column in ``-c``, meaning we get
three coloured bands for "COTO", "EPFU" and "TABR".

Other files
-----------

File ``mock_community.known.tsv`` describes the three species of bats expected
in the mock communities (which use different ratios).
